---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
inLanguage: null
starred: true
keywords: []
description: Extended for API
datePublished: '2016-02-03T19:09:23.092Z'
dateModified: '2016-02-03T19:09:06.272Z'
title: Good distribution Practice
author: []
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
sourcePath: _posts/2016-02-03-good-distribution-practice.md
published: true
url: good-distribution-practice/index.html
_type: Article

---
**GDP
Extended -- Covering API.**

With
the EU Falsified Medicines Directive (Directive 2011/62/EU) the
application of GDP for APIs has become mandatory. The EU Commissions
Guideline on the Principles of GDP for APIs is the first regulatory
binding document specifically for distribution activities of APIs.
This also applies for distribution between sites within a single
corporation.

This
document summarizes the impact assessment for the distribution
activities of APIs for an well-established pharmaceutical
organization.

"

GDP
is that part of quality assurance which ensures that the quality of
medicinal products is maintained throughout all stages of the supply
chain from the site of manufacturer to the pharmacy or person
authorized or entitled to supply medicinal products to the public."

GDP
DEFINITION (GDP Guidelines 2013/C 343/01).

The
GMP Part II/ICH Q7 for the manufacturers of API have been the only
Guideline partially covering GDP for API. These affect more the
handling of APIs at the manufacturing site, but not the

distribution
outside the manufacturing site.

For
the purpose of this document, the distribution of active substances
for medicinal products for human use is the procuring, importing,
holding, supplying or exporting active substances. Activities
consisting of re-packaging, re-labelling or dividing up of active
substances are manufacturing activities and as such are subject to
the guidelines on Good Manufacturing Practice of active substances.

For
the purpose of this guide "distributors" includes those parties
involved in trade and distribution e.g. (re)processors,
(re)packagers, transport and warehousing companies, forwarding
agents, brokers, traders, and suppliers other than the original
manufacturer.

The
word « should » is used several times in the EU Guideline on the
Principles of GDP for APIs. It indicates requirements and
recommendations that are expected to apply unless shown to be
inapplicable or replaced by an alternative that can be shown to
provide at least an equivalent level of quality assurance. Hence, «
should » does not mean that because it is only a «should», and not
a «must», then this requirement does not have to be met.

The
holder of a manufacturing authorization shall at least be obliged to
use only active substances, which have been manufactured in
accordance with good manufacturing practice for active substances and
distributed in accordance with good distribution practices for active
substances. Distributors of active substances may, according to
Article 111 of the same directive \[2001/83/EC\] , become subject to
inspections by the competent authority. On the other hand the holder
of the manufacturing authorization shall verify compliance with good
manufacturing practices and good distribution practices by conducting
audits at the manufacturer and distributors sites of active
substances.

**Abbreviations**

Used
abbreviations with this document:

API
-- Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient

EU
-- European Union

e.g.
-- exempli gratia -- for example

FDA
-- Food & Drug Administration

GDP
-- Good Distribution Practice

GMP
-- Good Manufacturing Practice

ICH
-- International Conference on Harmonisation

DS
-- Drug Substance

DP
-- Drug Product

SME
-- Subject Matter Expert

SOP
-- Standard Operating Procedure

WHO
-- World Health Organisation

A
subdivision in 13 chapters is made, following the Pharmaceutical
Inspection Convention; Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme
(PIC/S) Guide to GDP (PE 011-1) and Q7A from the FDA, again with the
emphasis on GDP for API (chapter 9 & 10).

**1\.
Quality Management**

Parties
involved in the distribution of APIs should have a Quality Management
System to manage the quality of their products and services, in order
to maintain the original quality of the APIs. As an essential
prerequisite for any Quality Management System, the top management
should elaborate a corporate quality philosophy (Quality Policy).

 

IMPACT:
No impact expected because a mature quality system is anticipated to
be in place.

**2\.
Organization and Personnel**

There
should be a quality unit or function that is independent of the
operational functions and ensures quality assurance (QA)
responsibilities e.g. documentation and traceability of the API
distribution activities. The organization should be documented in an
organizational chart. There should be an adequate number of personnel
qualified by appropriate education, training and/or experience to
perform and supervise activities concerning API distribution. A
system for planning, documentation and follow up of the training
should be in place. 



IMPACT:
Potential, Responsibility and Accountability between Operations and
Logistics/Supply Chain for the different stages of the Supply Chain
pertaining to API needs to be clarified, agreed, and documented. 

**3\.
Premises**

Buildings
and facilities used in the distribution of APIs should be located,
designed, and constructed to facilitate cleaning, maintenance, and
operations as appropriate to the type and stage of handling. Where
the equipment itself (e.g., closed or contained systems) provides
adequate protection of the material, such equipment can be located in
environmentally uncontrolled facilities (for T and %RH) or even
outdoors. There should be defined areas or other control systems for
the following activities: receipt, identification, sampling, and
quarantine of incoming materials, pending release, rejection or
further disposition. Facilities should also be designed to minimize
potential contamination. The contamination risk should also be
considered in respect to the flow of materials and personnel through
the building or facilities. 



IMPACT:
Potential, buildings and facilities used for the distribution of API
manufacturers should be defined areas or under other control systems
for the following activities: receipt, identification, sampling, and
quarantine of incoming materials, pending release, rejection or
further disposition.

**4\.
Warehousing and Storage**

General
principles can be found in the GSP--Good Storage Practices for
Pharmaceuticals. WHO Technical report, No.908, 2003, Also in Chapter
4 Warehousing & storage from the Active Pharmaceutical
Ingredients Committee (APIC) "How to do" Document (interpretation
of the ICH Q7A Guide) from the European Chemical Industry Council
(Cefic), (interpretation of ICH Q7).



IMPACT:
Potential, warehouse and (cold-) storage areas used for the API
manufacturers should be defined areas or under other control systems
for the following activities: receipt, identification, sampling, and
quarantine of incoming materials, pending release, rejection or
further disposition.

**5\.
Equipment**

Equipment
(including instruments!) used in the transport or storage of an API
should be designed in such a way as to minimize the possibilities of
cross contamination and to facilitate easy cleaning, maintenance and
operation. Equipment should be commissioned before use to ensure that
it is functioning as intended. Where such equipment is located
outdoors there should be suitable control to minimize the risk to API
from the environment. Procedures should describe maintenance of
equipment used in the holding, transfer or sampling of the API, and
how to manage equipment that is not in use. There should be records
of equipment use and maintenance.



IMPACT:
Potential; Impact needs to be assessed for the validation of
distribution and transport processes together with the
identification, training, and monitoring of staff responsible for
initiating, designing, performing, reviewing, and tracking of
distribution and transport validation, inbound and outbound, not just
for raw materials and finished product(s), but for intermediates, and
DS or Bulk DP as well.

**6\.
Documentation**

Procedure
on document control should be established. A revision history of
documents should be readily available. Retention periods of documents
should be established.



IMPACT:
Potential; Impact needs to be assessed for documentation for
Intermediates, DS, and Bulk DP as batch record, logbook, validations,
cleaning procedures and standard SOP for API manufacturers are
required according to GMP rules equally as for Finished Products.

**7\.
Repackaging and relabeling**

Processes
where APIs are exposed to the environment such as transferring API
from one container to another, e.g. from bulk equipment to storage
tanks/silos or from storage tanks/silos into containers, are critical
for product quality. Under these conditions APIs could be
contaminated with other products, lubricants, cleaners or any other
foreign matters. To minimize these risks ICH Q7 GMP principles should
be applied.



IMPACT:
Potential, API manufacturers also involved in the distribution of
active substance, Intermediate, DS, and Bulk DP, as intended in the
GDP guideline, must be in compliance with the above requirements.

**8\.
Complaints**

Complaints
and information about possible defects should be systematically
documented and investigated, with assigned responsibilities.



IMPACT:
Potential, Responsibility & Accountability for complaints and
complaints handling between Operations and Logistic s/Supply Chain
pertaining to Intermediates, DS, and Bulk DP needs to be clarified,
agreed, and documented.

**9\.
Recalls**

Functions
involved in the supply chain should implement written procedures to
manage API recall (retrieval). 

The
procedure should:

‐

describe
how the process of recall (retrieval) should be managed, based on the
risk involved,

‐

describe
a decision making process with defined responsibilities,

‐

define
the functions involved in the process (e.g. Quality Assurance, sales,
logistics, competent authorities etc.),

‐

define
the communication process and documentation, and

‐

define
the steps needed to retrieve the material.



IMPACT:
Potential, Responsibility & Accountability for handling recalls
between Operations and Logistic s/Supply Chain pertaining to
Intermediates, DS, and Bulk DP needs to be clarified, agreed, and
documented.

**10\.
Returned goods**

Returned
APIs should be identified as such and held pending resolution.
Procedures for holding, labelling, testing, and any processing of the
returned API should be in accordance with written procedures. Records
of returned products should be maintained and should include the name
of the APIs and the lot number (or batch number), reason for the
return, quantity returned, date of disposition, and ultimate date of
the returned API.



IMPACT:
Potential, API manufacturers also involved in the distribution of
Intermediates, DS and Bulk DP, as intended in the GDP guideline, must
be incompliance with the above requirements.

**11\.
Handling of non‐conforming materials **

Additionally
the original manufacturer of the API has to be informed about the
situation. 



IMPACT:
Yes, API manufacturers also involved in the distribution of
Intermediates, DS and Bulk DP, as intended in the GDP guideline, must
be incompliance with the above requirements.

**12\.
Dispatch and transport**

Transport
conditions and the equipment to be used should be defined according
to the characteristics of the products. Any special transport
conditions should be monitored and recorded. In case of temperature
excursions during transportation tools like e.g. stability studies,
cycling studies, shipping studies, Mean Kinetic Temperature concept
could be used in combination with a risk assessment to assess the
potential impact on the API.



IMPACT:
Yes, API manufacturers also involved in the distribution of
Intermediates, DS and Bulk DP, as intended in the GDP guideline, must
be in compliance with the above requirements (selection of correct
transporters, qualification, quality agreement, certifications risk
analysis, monitoring of temperature, declaration for use of second
transporter in the chain, cleaning of truck, etc).

**13\.
Contract activities**

There
should be a written and approved contractor agreement between the
contract giver and the contract acceptor that defines in detail the
GDP responsibilities, including the quality measures, of each party;
as described in the guideline.



IMPACT:
Yes, API manufacturers also involved in the distribution of
Intermediates, DS and Bulk DP, as intended in the GDP guideline, must
be in compliance with the above requirements as part of correct GMP
approach.